So why don't we start with the museum?
Can you remember what did you see in the museum and what did it remind you of?
Yeah, when we came to the museum and we went upstairs,
we saw the lady was doing the wool and knitting.
So this is reminded me from my childhood.
So when we were in the school, we finished the school, our uncle used,
when we come back from the school, our uncle said sit down and start doing the knitting
and do the baskets and the mat,
sitting mats, we have to make it.
So we have to climb all the way because we have lots of date tree very long.
So we somebody have to climb and take it out the leaves because the leaves is very strong.
And we do the, I don't know what you call for, you know, you do.
Knitting or weaving?
Weaving, I think.
Yeah. So we have to make it one by one.
Like you do with the hair, plaiting, plaiting, sorry.
We have to do that one and make it one by one and attach to each other.
But it takes us a whole day to make one.
And then we, when we finish this one, go back home and then study for one hour.
And then tomorrow early morning, we have to again wake up.
So we didn't have chance to play or speak friends or something like that.
But it was reminded me of my childhood, how we was working hard for little things.
So it's really nice when I went over in the museum.
And also when we went around and see different clothes.
So we used to have the small, we sit down like with my auntie, mother, my sisters.
And they, the person bring us like clothes where you have to do the designs.
Immortary.
So he bring small, small bits, different colors, and he give us the design.
So we have to do this one.
It take us like two weeks to finish whole dress.
Somebody bring their weddings.
Somebody bring their traditional dress to do it.
But we have to put it in the wooden, square wooden.
Have to put that clothes in and then we have to, that material and then we do the sewing.
Yeah.
So it's really remind me lots of things when I came to the museum.
So the baskets and the mats.
Yeah.
What are the, what's the traditional word for that in your language?
It's, and you're speaking Arabic?
Arabic.
Yeah.
What's the word in Arabic?
The mat called Sijada and the basket called Silla in Arabic.
Were they, were you, was your uncle making them?
Why was he making them and why were you making them?
Was it to sell them?
Yeah, to sell them and get some money from it.
Yeah.
And also we have something called Fokhar.
Fokhar.
It's with the, we make it with the,
you know when you make with your hand,
like a vase and cups.
Mud.
Clay?
Clay.
We used to sit down and make that one.
Okay.
Also to sell?
Also to sell, yeah.
So he have a like in the road, he sit down and sell this kind of things.
So we have, we used to help him all the time to do the, with the clay maker,
the cups, plates and also we make the pot to cook the food.
When you cook this food in this pot, which we make it with our hand,
it makes really delicious food and you can feel that deliciousness and
when it cooked inside it, you,
food is different.
You cannot taste this kind of food anywhere else.
Yeah.
So he had lots of, lots of skills, dressmaking.
We used to do this, like a woman used to do the clothes making, the knitting ones.
And with my uncles, we used to do the clay ones, make it and also the baskets and the mats.
Yeah.
So you said you were working hard.
Yeah. And because you weren't very, very old.
No.
Can you tell me a bit more about how old you were, who you were doing it with and how it felt to do
handicrafts?
We were around eight to nine years old and sit with my uncles and we used to
make it, but it feels like when I see my friends, they are playing, they call me and they say,
come we can play, but we was like, you know, forced to do something.
So it's really hard.
Our hands used to pain and even we tell them, they say, no, you have to do it because if we
don't do it from where we can get money or how we survive, you know, so we used to help and do
the things they say us to do.
Was that normal for children to be working like that?
Not all. Some of them. Other of my friends, they didn't force, but our situation maybe was
difficult and hard, so we have to do to help them.
So was there anything else at the museum? You said it was the lady spinning the wool
or was it the weaving that reminded you of the basket weaving?
Basket weaving.
But which object was it that you saw that reminded you of that?
The one she was, like a wheel and she was doing in the, her
tie. She was doing it, so it's reminded because we got lots of sheep, animals, so we do have to
cut their skin, the wool, and bring it and then we give it. So they teach us how to do, help them.
So you would do the thigh ones. Can you tell me a bit more about how you would make the yarn
and then what you would do with it?
They make it, they do it with the tie, but make it,
so they do it with their tie, make it very thin so they can then use it for the sewing as well
for the clothing and doing other stuff with it.
So you would use that to sew on the clothes?
Yes.
Would you also knit with it?
Knit, we do it, but that will be like our mother, they knit the clothes like my mother,
she make for my son a hat and she send it over, so all three of my children, they share it.
And they wear the hats.
I remember them telling you about that on the day, they were very sweet.
They were very excited and happy to tell you their story.
So I think in future it's something to think about if we can do it with the kids.
And also you know with the hat, the Arab people wear it, so we do sew that one as well,
but it will be like designs and it will be holes, so you just take the needle and sew it,
but different, different color. It will be like in the paper, in the picture they show you,
and you have to do that.
So this one, the main whale that had, yeah.
Were you making those when you were younger too?
Yeah.
Is there anything else you'd like to tell me about the museum trip,
things you saw, things you were reminded of?
The museum have reminded a lot of things, like you know the wooden design of it,
so it reminds us like our houses was like you know, big space,
and all the things, most of the things over there like a blanket, old blankets, yeah.
They reminded us of our childhood where we was doing it and sleeping on it, yeah.
Thank you very much that we've been there.
It's really interesting to hear that it was so impactful, and I know it was a long journey.
Long journey, yeah. I told one of my friends as well, she was really excited, she wanted to come
and see the museum when I told her it reminded my back home and what we used to do with it,
and it reminded me good things and bad as well.
So how we, it was good like we was as a family doing everything, I was with my family, but
now I'm here by myself, so it's a bit, you know, you remember those things, yeah.
It's both happy and painful, isn't it?
Yes, it is.
Happy to have those memories.
Memories, yeah, but it is a little bit struggle life, you know.
Do you mean when you were younger it was?
It was hard, it was very hard. I don't want my, I want my children to learn this kind of thing,
but not forced to do something.
Yeah, yeah.
It wasn't like for us easy, it's like from ourself we wanted to learn to do some. Now my children,
if they wanted they will say, oh mom, can we do that? Can we help you in the cooking? But
for us it wasn't like we wanted, it was all by force, you have to
do this thing, so it was really hard because during whole week we have to do that.
It's like if we get time even for the studies it will be in the night time,
and again from morning we will start doing the same thing.
Did you also have to work before school or did you always do it after school?
Because schools start from seven o'clock in the morning, so when we, they wake us from the prayer
then we sit down and whatever we can help with the cooking and everything, breakfast.
And then school all day.
School all day and when we come back from the school straight away we do help.
That's a lot isn't it?
A lot.
Is there anything else you'd like to tell me about the museum,
what you saw and the memories you had, anything else?
Only those memories, yeah.
How much money would you get for a basket or a mat?
No because my uncle, he take it so we just help him to get there.
Thank you for sharing those stories about the museum.
So now I know you have to go soon but I wondered if you wanted to do a little bit
of the interview, just 10 minutes maybe whilst you're here.
Okay no problem.
So you've told, one of my questions was about your childhood but you've told me quite a bit about
your childhood. Is there anything else about your childhood you'd like to share?
My childhood was really difficult because we do have to like work and then we do have to,
we can't get what we wanted and if we dress up always we have to be long, proper so it wasn't
like free freedom what you get it, no. But we have to do everything strictly, listen,
listen in a way if not then we will be banned.
We cannot only do works only, nothing we can do.
Is there anything else about your childhood you'd like to share?
You said you were in, you did go to school?
Yeah we used to go to the school, come back but when I see my friends they play, they have to,
they can do something but in the play time I have to do my homeworks
because I don't have time later on to do anything, my homework or anything like that.
So it was always I remember I have to cry and it's really hard yeah.
I don't want my children to do or suffer.
So can you tell me a bit about your experience of coming to Wales?
Again it doesn't have to be anything you don't want to share.
When I came to Wales like
everyone when they go somewhere they are excited to
go somewhere new, get some new things, see different.
And it was very welcoming when we came to Wales. It was
people guided us where to go, what to do and helped us and lots of communities are there
to support and advise you. And I really like felt Wales is like a home to me and
I was happy because lots of different people from different communities and they
people from different communities and they
come together and celebrate the things and we meet up sometimes we do some cooking
like lots of activities Wales have for us to do keep us busy.
How long have you been here? Around nine years.
Yeah.
Has your relationship with Wales changed at all in those nine years or do you feel the same as
you did when you came? I got like a strong relationship because it's been like been long
time and it gives me lots of positive energies and also help develop my skills
and empower me to do something help me with the to move
move forward see new things build new things
like I went in the front not in the back yeah so I'm very happy for that yeah.
I was wondering if you can tell me what home the idea of home means to you?
Home is where I feel safe comfortable and happy with my family
where I can trust and be there like ensure myself I'm nothing happened to me I'm safe.
This is what I feel a home is and we're always think about the positive things not a negative
and always think about the future going to be better rather than I think no something bad will
happen. Can you describe a place or time or moment in your life that's important to you?
The moment when my child was child born so I was alone in the hospital and I was very scared
because I didn't know that much language and the lady was delivered to me
I don't know I didn't feel very comfortable I was so scared I thought like I was crying crying
but when the doctor came so when he saw my situation he said what happened what is wrong
I was scared to tell him with this lady I don't know I didn't feel comfortable so
he changed the midwife for me I was so surprised that he done that for me
that moment and that thing I never forget that even I'm from another place
they done something for me you know
so I felt that yeah this is my home they they did listen understand my thing yeah
yeah
I'm glad to hear you felt listened to thank you
sounds like that was very meaningful for you yeah
because he they did understand you know I was really happy because this was my first child I
was alone no family nothing and they just asked me why you are not comfortable for what reason
so when I told the reason they straight away changed and I was surprised that they can do
for me and I'm not belong to their country so it was something shocking and something you know
I'm also excited I was very very like I cannot describe what
they done for me like I was very happy that time yeah
this is the moment I cannot forget
it.
Wow thank you for sharing that and that's you know it sounds like that was very very very meaningful
to you yeah yeah
I wonder if you could tell me a bit about I know we have to finish soon your hopes for the future
yeah my hope in the future I always like to help people who whoever come new here they don't know
so I do help them to whatever I can help like one of lady she's suffering she she got
divorced from her husband she's crying all the time she needs somebody to listen so I always
there for her and help her she wanted to her children to change the school she moved out
somewhere else so I did help her take her to places where she can get help as well so like
Welles teach gave me lots of good lessons to teach others so I'm really happy and proud of it yeah.
Could you tell me a bit more about what have been those experiences or opportunities that have
helped you to get more confident is it that you've had some training or education or just experiences
like Bawzu Bawzu supported us a lot with courses to like time management and
get confident ourselves they teach us like we can do something we are able
is because before we just listening you can't do this you can't do that this is what but
when we are here now we have that ability that we can say yes I can do something or I can share
something or we was just scared you know can't do anything somebody have to be with us no
now even we are alone but we can manage everything by ourselves we can also advise others and help
them what they can able to do yeah you're experts in your experience now yes this is what wells teach
us so I'm really happy
I know you have to go soon but I wonder if there's anything else you'd like to share or that you feel
is important for us to know about about you in your life and your story I just
advise everyone to be strong and do what you want to do don't think that everyone have their own
ability and skills to do something but they skate like English language is the barrier for
them to do something but but here they are helping with courses and supporting women so
they can do so I just encourage them to do something rather than sitting that's why
we go to the groups where they can teach sewing they can learn with it and IT for the women
so we do that yeah do you have any other hopes for the future of what you'd like like to do
for the future I want to be like do something for the ladies who cannot able to
do anything you know so we do some like run communities or help them to improve
and get confident that they can do something
is there anything else you'd like to share I know it's 10-2 now you have to leave but
I know it's okay thank you so much